= Related Works

In 2007, at the start of this project, there were few options for advanced
automotive audio systems. In 2016 there are several options to choose from and
large commercial entities have deployed their software in new cars. It is also
possible to purchase full-featured hardware running advanced operating systems
such as Android and install them into any compatible automotive dashboard.

== Complete

=== iCarus

The iCarus Car PC <<icarus>> is a commercially available independent  hardware
and software solution that can be inserted into a car dashboard and used for
similar purposes as this project. The software runs Linux with some proprietary
application code.  The hardware consists of a custom board with several
peripherals such as 802.11 and Bluetooth wireless networking aconnected to an
off-the-shelf Raspberry Pi single-board PC. At the time of this writing, a fully
functioning unit can be purchased directly from the maker for 284 EUR
<<icarus-shop>>.

=== Harman Connected Car

Harman Connected Car <<car-harman-com>> is a large project claiming to support
bringing a wide range of automotive subsystems within a multimedia environment.
This project appears to an extensive and professional solution and is currently
deployed or being deployed in automobiles of at least 24 major international car
brands <<harman-connected-vehicles>>. Features such as audio, communications,
air conditioning integration, navigation, voice recognition, cameras, and
sensors are supported. Furthermore, the solution also includes a remote
management platform to handle over-the-air software updates.

=== Wind River Helix Chassis

Helix Chassis <<helix-chassis>>, by Wind River, is another full software
solution by a major technology company. It offers a similar set of capabilities
as the Harman Connected Car solution. Wind River claims over 70 customers
implementing solutions with the Helix Chassis suite.

== Frameworks and Standards

=== Android and Android Auto

Android is a Linux-based operating system targeted toward mobile and
entertainment devices such as phones, tablets, and television set top boxes. It
is possible for independent developers to leverage the Android Open Source
Project in building a custom operating system for automotive systems on top of
existing Android components. Android has also released its own automotive
variant, Android Auto, which is deployed in several 2016 and 2017 car dashboards
as well as available in Android phones docked inside a car. Application
development in Android is typically carried out with Java or other languages
compatible with the Java Virtual Machine.

=== GENIVI

GENIVI is an alliance of several automotive manufacturers and automotive audio
suppliers coordinating on several open source components to provide the core
functionalities necessary to provide the foundation of a custom automotive
operating system.
