== Implementation

This section describes the implementation of the project's software.

=== Platform

This section covers all concrete choices made regarding third-party software
libraries and systems in addition to any third-party project infrastructure
included in the project.

==== Bootloader

The bootloader chosen for this project is Das U-Boot <<uboot>>, an open source
bootloader supporting several embedded architectures. This software exposes all
the necessary facilities to locate, load and execute the real operating system
kernel which will host the project's software.

==== Operating System

The operating system chosen for this project is Linux, an open source operating
system kernel that runs on many embedded computer systems as well as larger ones
<<linux-readme>>. Much of the software written for this project will run on any
UNIX-like operating system, however.

==== Frameworks

When developing applications, the choice of frameworks can be the most
significant driving influence in the implementations of a project. While this
project has chosen Linux as its operating system, it has been developed heavily
with portable libraries that can be built (and run) on other operating systems
and architectures. This project has chosen to only build upon open source
libraries.

At the lowest level, all the application code of this project uses GLib
<<glib-overview>>, a portable utility library providing many data structures and
support functionality to assist application development. GLib also includes
GObject, a C-based object-oriented type system, and GIO, an asynchronous
Input/Output (I/O) library with many more additional application support
features. Importantly, GIO provides a client and server implementation of the
D-Bus protocol using GIO's asynchronous I/O model.

==== Programming Language

Initially, this project was programmed in Vala, a language with a similar
syntactical appearance to C# but targeting the GObject type system. This is
achieved by the Vala compiler generating GObject-style C code and mapping
documentation annotations as well as custom metadata to Vala constructs. Since
Vala is just a code generator, its use does not require a virtual machine,
runtime interpreter, or garbage collector. These properties are advantageous to
embedded software development where processing speed, memory usage, and power
consumption are less abundant than desktop or server environments. Vala allows
for fairly rapid prototype development due to its significantly smaller amount
of boilerplate code necessary to define and implement object-oriented constructs
such as interfaces and classes (as well as subclassing). Through the development
of the project, many difficulties were experienced with this language that
required the author to fix bugs within the Vala language or its bindings to
external libraries. Furthermore, the nature of the Vala language and libraries
implemented with the GObject type system introduce a maintenance requirement for
the Vala bindings to a specific library. Changes to APIs and incorrect
transcription or scanning will lead to discrepancies between the original C API
of a library and the generated or manually maintained Vala bindings. These
deficiencies, combined with the declining activity of the Vala project have
disqualified the language from being the primary language of this project.

Due to the project GObject Introspection <<gobject-introspection>>, many more
programming languages are available to the GObject programmer. GObject
Introspection provides automatic bindings from GObject libraries to JavaScript,
Python, Lua, Perl, Ruby, Guile, and other languages <<gi-users>>. Similar to
Vala, which is partially compatible with GObject Introspection, projects
employing GObject Introspection are subject to mismatched bindings. Furthermore,
attempts to map GObject semantics into a specific programming language's idioms
are not guaranteed.

The compound effects of developing with non-native programming languages during
the development process eventually led to their abandonment in favor of
GObject-style C. The C11 revision of C was eventually chosen for this project
since it is fully supported by the compilers GCC <<gcc-c11-compatibility>> and
Clang <<clang-c11-compatibility>>. This choice provides full control of all
library APIs with the slightly inconvenient syntax of the GObject type system's
C macros.

==== Build System

Build systems are an important part of any sufficiently large software project.
They are responsible for configuring any target-specific options and producing
target artifacts, the part of the project that will be consumed by the end-user.
The most common build system for UNIX-style projects is make, part of the POSIX
standard. Limitations in make have repeatedly influenced efforts in producing
new build systems over the years. Among the replacements, GNU Autotools and
CMake are the most popular for UNIX-style projects. Waf and Meson were also
evaluated during the development of this project. After evaluation, Meson was
eventually chosen as the build system for this project. Ninja is a newer tool
that is very similar to Make in that it only supports scheduling and running
tasks based on recipes and it claims to perform those tasks with a higher degree
of parallelism.

GNU Autotools, also known as the GNU Build System, is a
combination of GNU Autoconf <<gnu-autoconf>>, GNU Automake, <<gnu-automake>>,
GNU Libtool <<gnu-libtool>>, and GNU Make <<gnu-make>>. These tools are
orchestrated in order to provide a fully portable solution for building software
projects. While Autotools is a well-tested product with many users, it suffers
from a few of its own deficiencies. First, to use Autotools in any non-trivial
capacity requires the basic knowledge of several languages including m4, POSIX
shell, as well as the GNU makefile syntax.  Furthermore, since it eventually
relies on make, Autotools has limitations in its ability to parallelize the
compilation of object files from C source, which is a highly parallelizable
process. The main steps of building an Autotools project are generating the
configuration script (autoconf), configuring a specific build instance
(configure), and performing the actual build (make).

CMake is a newer project which follows part of the Autotools strategy but
unifies the entire build description into a single language, which is new and
specific to CMake. Its principal similarity to Autotools is that it generates
Makefiles during a configuration stage. CMake can also generate build files for
the Ninja build tool as well as many IDE-specific project files.

Waf is a complete replacement attempt of a configuration and build tool into a
single self-contained tool. It provides similar features to Autotools with
claimed performance gains as well as simplicity of the build description files.
Similar to other existing systems, Waf basically follows a configure-then-build
pattern. Its build descriptor files are written in Python, eliminating the need
to learn a new language that will not be useful for any other purpose. Its
internal build tool also has a job scheduler which allows it to achieve higher
parallelism rates than a project using a recursive set of Makefiles.

Finally, the newest addition evaluated for the project is Meson, which is an
experience somewhere between that of CMake and Waf. It has a custom build
descriptor language for which is similar to Python and is implemented in Python.
It does not contain its own build tool but it generates only Ninja build files
and some IDE-specific project files. Meson has other strengths, though, that
qualify it better for this project than the other tools. First, it has built-in
functionality to integrate with parts of the GLib platform infrastructure,
providing build targets for GResource bundles, GSettings schemas, GDBus code
generation, as well as other tools. Finally, while cross-compilation is
supported at some level all the previously mentioned solutions -- with Autotools
being the most extensive -- Meson completely encapsulates the cross-compilation
toolchain functionality in a single file that can be shared across any number of
projects that are built with Meson.

==== Filesystem Build System

In addition to building the components authored during this project, it is also
necessary to build operating system images for the storage media. This is a
complicated task and requires gathering all the dependencies of the project and
building them in order. There are several systems that intend to ease embedded
development with regard to building root filesystems. The two systems evaluated
for this project are OpenEmbedded <<oe-home>> and Buildroot <<buildroot-home>>.
Buildroot was eventually chosen as the filesystem builder for this project.

Buildroot is composed mainly of Makefiles with some additional support tools.
These Makefile rules factorize and abstract the commonly duplicated rules
necessary for cross-compiling packages built with several common build systems
such as the ones mentioned previously. It is capable of building an entire Linux
distribution from nothing including the cross-development toolchain, the Linux
kernel, all software packages needed for a target platform, and the actual
filesystem images for various types of storage. Furthermore, for independent
projects, it supports overlaying its existing supported packages with a
user-specified set of external packages. This feature provides a well-defined
path for developers to add independently maintained board support packages,
experimental, or special-interest functionality to the Buildroot system.

=== Components

This section describes all the components implemented as the software portion of
this project.

==== Media Data Service

The Media Data Service is an implementation of the media service interface. It
is responsible for handling discovery of media sources, finding media content in
those sources, and providing a searching and browsing D-Bus API for found media.
The service also performs analysis on media files in order to supply textual and
graphical metadata to consumers.

==== Media Player Service

The Media Player service is simply a media player and an implementation of the
media player interface. Its only purpose is to manage the playback and queueing
of media content cataloged by the Media Data Service. It exposes a D-Bus API to
allow a mediating consumer of itself and the Media Data service. It is
implemented as a subclass of the GIO GApplication class and encapsulates a
GStreamer pipeline to play back audio and a custom data structure for playlists.

==== Geolocation Service

The Geolocation Service is an implementation of the geolocation interface. It is
responsible for communicating with a GPS receiver device and exporting its
geolocation data in a D-Bus API. It is implemented as a GIO GApplication
subclass and emits signals whenever the status of the GPS receiver is updated.

==== Messaging Service

The Messaging Service is an implementation of the messaging service interface.
It is responsible for communicating with compatible mobile communications
devices over the Bluetooth protocol. Furthermore, this service is responsible
for integrating with the underlying operating system's Bluetooth framework to
expose the pairing workflow to the Graphical User Interface. It is implemented
as a GIO GApplication subclass.

==== Graphical User Interface

Combining all the data available through the previously described D-Bus
interfaces, this project's Graphical User Interface (GUI) presents a contextual
view of the overall system state and react to out-of-band events. The GUI
operates in its own process space and does not directly manage any of the
underlying technology. The GUI is a full-screen application implemented with the
GTK+ 3.0 user interface toolkit. The project contains several views are
necessary for a usable product.

===== Top-Level Views

The user interface contains two top-level views, the idle view and the home
view.

The idle view <<gui-idle>> is displayed when no activities are running and no
communications with the user have been detected within a set period of time. It
will overlay any existing view and expose the previous view when the interface
is re-activated.

[[gui-idle]]
.Idle View
image::figures/gui-idle.svg[align="center"]

The home view <<gui-home>> is a basic menu of buttons which allows the user to
begin their chosen activity.

[[gui-home]]
.Home View
image::figures/gui-home.svg[align="center"]

===== Music Views

The music views are the primary focus of this project and the most complex. They
mainly synthesize information from the music service to allow navigating a
collection of media on connected devices and managing the playback of media.
These views were designed and developed with a focus on minimal amount of
interaction with the user in order to minimize distractions.

[[gui-music-trackset]]
.Abstract Track Set Browser
image::figures/gui-music-trackset.svg[align="center"]

The first music view <<gui-music-trackset>> is a abstract browser that is
capable of navigating through a single-level list of textual information one
page at a time. This view is realized and slightly refined as an Artists view,
an Artist Detail view <<gui-music-artist-detail>>, an Albums view, Playlists
view, an Album view, a Playlist view, and a Track List view. Each instance of
one of these views are stacked on top of each other during navigation and the
top view is discarded when the user navigates backward.

[[gui-music-artist-detail]]
.Artist Detail View
image::figures/gui-music-artist-detail.svg[align="center"]

===== Maps Views

When a Geolocation source is available along with mapping data, The GUI contains
contain a basic map view, displaying the user's location at a modifiable
magnification level.

===== Messaging Views

The messaging aspect of the GUI simply display temporary notifications of
telephone call as well as text messaging information. During a hands-free phone
call, the user interface view is interrupted to provide call status on the
screen. The messaging subsystem of the GUI is also tasked with implementing
the visual side of the Bluetooth device pairing process.

===== Settings Views

In order to provide some customizability during runtime, each configurable
feature of this project can expose its configurable properties into the
application's settings view. There are also global settings that are configured
with this view.
