= Conclusion and Further Research

Given the wide-ranging solutions provided by some of the newer commercially
backed systems that are shipping in newer automobiles as well as the dominance
of the Android operating system for mobile devices, this project would need a
significant amount of work to be performed to achieve competitive market share,
though that was not a goal of this project. This section outlines several future
areas which this project could be expanded in scope and depth. One area this
project should not receive any development is any "Cloud" integration.

== Automotive Integration

A clear area of functionality that could benefit this project is the addition of
features that integrate with automotive hardware such as On-Board Diagnostics
(OBD), Tire Pressure Monitoring System (TPMS), and climate control.

== Navigation

While this project can supply maps and geolocation, it does not supply any
navigation directions from one location to another. Many existing solutions
provide navigation instructions and traffic integration.

== Mesh Networking

An ambitious, largely untapped, and potentially dangerous power of every car on
the road containing wireless networking capabilities introduces many
possibilities for the future of transportation. For example, automobiles could
potentially broadcast important information to each other in order to inform
drivers of upcoming hazards and other conditions such as average speed. This
type of network can provide a non-commercial, peer-to-peer replacement of
proprietary live traffic data offered by paid services.

== Security

This project, as-is, does not suffer from many security threats since there is
not much at stake, a limited surface to attack, and no valuable information
stored. However, any networking features and integration with automotive
components will most likely place a system such as this project under a much
larger threat.
